skeleton for data studio checkpoints (#26)
seqeralabs/docs: platform_versioned_docs/version-23.4.0/data/data-studios.mdx

Currently, Data Studios only supports AWS Batch compute environments that **do not** have Fargate enabled.
:::

## Overview

Select the **Data Studios** tab to view all data studios. The list includes the name, cloud provider, analysis template, region, creator, creation date, and the status of each session. In this view, you can add a new data studio, as well as start, stop, and connect to an existing data studio. You can dynamically filter the list of data studio sessions using the search bar.

> ## Data studio checkpoints

Reviewer: @robnewman, I go back and forth on that, but I can definitely avoid disrupting the overall structure at this time and revert to what we had and approved previously.

> When you start a data studio, it automatically creates a *checkpoint*. A checkpoint persists changes that you make to the data studio root filesystem. The checkpoint is persisted on the compute environment's working directory.

Reviewer 2: "The checkpoint is persisted on the compute environment's working directory"

Should add that this is defined when creating a compute environment and link to the CE work dir docs.

> When you start a data studio, it automatically creates a *checkpoint*. A checkpoint persists changes that you make to the data studio root filesystem. The checkpoint is persisted on the compute environment's working directory.

Reviewer: @robnewman, the work directory docs for SP or for the specific CE provider, AWS, ect?

> When you start a data studio, it automatically creates a *checkpoint*. A checkpoint persists changes that you make to the data studio root filesystem. The checkpoint is persisted on the compute environment's working directory.

Reviewer 2: > This should include concrete examples, like installing packages or writing files.
Ah - I see the concrete examples below. You can ignore this change.

> If you start a data studio from a previously created checkpoint, changes such as installed software packages and configuration files are restored and available in the data studio session. Changes to mounted datasets are not included in the checkpoint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you restart, or start a new, data studio from a previously created checkpoint, changes such as installed software packages and configuration files are restored and available in the data studio session. Changes to mounted datasets are not included in the checkpoint.
```

Reviewer: @robnewman, this was that attempt at concrete examples.

## Data studio statuses

Data studios have the following possible statuses:

- **starting**: The data studio is initializing.

> - **running**: When a data studio session is **running**, you can connect to it, copy the data studio URL, or stop it. In addition, the session can continue to process requests/run computations in the absence of an ongoing connection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **running**: When a data studio session is **running** and your user role is greater than **Viewer**, you can connect to it, copy the data studio URL, or stop it. In addition, the session can continue to process requests/run computations in the absence of an ongoing connection.
```

- **stopping**: The recently-running session is in the process of being stopped.

> - **stopped**: When a session is stopped, the associated compute resources are deallocated and any unsaved state is lost. You can start a session or delete the data studio when it's in this state.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **stopped**: When a session is stopped, the associated compute resources are deallocated and any unsaved state is lost. If your user role is at least `Maintainer` you can start a session or delete the data studio when it's in this state.
```

- **errored**: This state most often indicates that there has been an error starting the data studio but it is in a **stopped** state. There might be errors reported by the data studio session itself but these currently will be overwritten with a **running** status if the studio is still running. If you encounter an error with the private preview release of Data Studios, please reach out to your Seqera account manager.

> ## Add a data studio

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Add a data studio

This functionality is available to users with the **Maintainer** role and above.
```

1. Select **Add data studio**.

> 2. Select a template from the three options provided (JupyterLab, RStudio Server, or Visual Studio Code).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Select a container image template from the three options provided (JupyterLab, RStudio Server, or Visual Studio Code).
```

You'll be returned to the Data Studios landing page that displays the list of data studios in your workspace. The data studio you created will be listed with the status **stopped**.

:::note

> By default, Data Studios has read and write permissions to any dataset mounted to a session. This means that data can be written from the data studio session back to the cloud storage bucket mounted. To stop potential data loss, only one data studio session per workspace can mount a dataset. When adding a new data studio, datasets already mounted to other running data studios are unavailable. If a new file is uploaded to the cloud storage bucket while a session is running, the file may not be available to the data studio session.

Reviewer: @robnewman, @jimmypoms, what do you think? Thanks!

> By default, Data Studios has read and write permissions to any dataset mounted to a session. This means that data can be written from the data studio session back to the cloud storage bucket mounted. To stop potential data loss, only one data studio session per workspace can mount a dataset. When adding a new data studio, datasets already mounted to other running data studios are unavailable. If a new file is uploaded to the cloud storage bucket while a session is running, the file may not be available to the data studio session.

Author: Are we using `dataset` as a general term to refer to data sets and cloud buckets from data explorer (aka data links)?

> By default, Data Studios has read and write permissions to any dataset mounted to a session. This means that data can be written from the data studio session back to the cloud storage bucket mounted. To stop potential data loss, only one data studio session per workspace can mount a dataset. When adding a new data studio, datasets already mounted to other running data studios are unavailable. If a new file is uploaded to the cloud storage bucket while a session is running, the file may not be available to the data studio session.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, Data Studios has read and write permissions to any mounted data. This means that data can be written from the data studio session back to the cloud storage mounted. To stop potential data loss, only one data studio session per workspace can mount a unique data path. When adding a new data studio, data paths already mounted to other running data studios are unavailable. If a new file is uploaded to the cloud storage bucket path while a session is running, the file may not be available to the data studio session immediately.
```

Once a data studio session is in a **running** state, you can connect to it, obtain the public link to the session to share with collaborators inside your workspace, and stop it.

## Start an existing data studio as a new data studio

This functionality is available to users with the **Maintain** role and above.

You can use an existing data studio as the basis for starting a new data studio. This functionality creates a clone of the copied data studio, including its existing checkpoints, allowing you to preserve any modifications that you made to the original data studio. When you create a data studio based in this way, future changes are isolated from the original data studio.

> The following fields are immutable and cannot be changed:

Reviewer 2: Immutable by definition means cannot be changed, so have one or the other, but not both (redundant):

```suggestion
The following fields are immutable:
```

Reviewer: @robnewman, lol, true.

- **Data studio template**
- **Original data studio and checkpoint**
- **Compute environment**

> To create a new data studio from an existing data studio, complete the following steps:

Reviewer 2: This is only true for data studio sessions in a stopped state

```suggestion
To add a new data studio from an existing **stopped** data studio, complete the following steps:
```

1. In a workspace, select **Data Studios**.
1. From the list of data studios in your workspace, select the three dots next to the status message for the data studio you want to start, then select **Start as new**.

> 1. Optional: Customize the following fields:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. This opens the **Add data studio** form. Optionally customize the following fields:
```

Reviewer: @robnewman, I might rephrase this based on: https://developers.google.com/style/procedures#steps-with-results-or-justifications

    - **Data studio name**

>     - **Description**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - **Description**: By default, the parent data studio name(s).
```

    - **Mounted data**
    - **CPU**
    - **Memory**
1. Select **Add** to add the new data studio.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Additionally, you can add a new data studio from any existing data studio checkpoint (excluding the currently running checkpoint). From the data studio detail page, select the **Checkpoints** tab and in the **Actions** column, select **Start as new**. This is useful for tertiary analysis experimentation without impacting the state of the original data studio.
```

Reviewer: @robnewman, per Google Developer Style, we're minimizing parenthesis where possible: https://developers.google.com/style/parentheses

Reviewer 2: You can remove the parentheses, but I still think this text block makes more sense below the "Adding" from a stopped data studio.

Once a data studio session is in a **running** state, you can connect to it, obtain the public link to the session to share with collaborators inside your workspace, and stop it.

## Start an existing data studio as a new data studio

This functionality is available to users with the **Maintain** role and above.

You can use any existing data studio as the foundation for adding a new data studio. This functionality creates a clone of the data studio, including its checkpoint history, preserving any modifications made to the original data studio. When you create a data studio based in this way, future changes are isolated from the original data studio.

> Additionally, you can add a new data studio from any existing data studio checkpoint except the currently running checkpoint. From the data studio detail page, select the **Checkpoints** tab and in the **Actions** column, select **Start as new data studio**. This is useful for tertiary analysis experimentation without impacting the state of the original data studio.

Reviewer 2: This no longer makes sense here. "Additionally," does not mean anything.

```suggestion
You can add a new data studio from any existing data studio checkpoint except the currently running checkpoint. From the data studio detail page, select the **Checkpoints** tab and in the **Actions** column, select **Start as new data studio**. This is useful for tertiary analysis experimentation without impacting the state of the original data studio.
```

> The following fields are immutable:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When adding a new data studio from an existing data studio or data studio checkpoint, the following fields are immutable:
```

To install extensions, click the Extensions button.

> ## Start a data studio

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Start a data studio

This functionality is available to users with the **Maintainer** role and above.
```

Once a data studio session is in a **running** state, you can connect to it, obtain the public link to the session to share with collaborators inside your workspace, and stop it.

> ## Connect to a data studio

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Connect to a data studio

This functionality is available to all user roles excluding the **Viewer** role.
```

![](./_images/data_studios.png)

## Collaborate in a data studio

This functionality is available to all user roles excluding the **View** role.

To share a link to a running data studio with collaborators inside your workspace, select the three dots next to the status message for the data studio you want to share, then select **Copy data studio URL**. Using this link other authenticated users can access the session directly.

:::note
Collaborators need valid workspace permissions to connect to the running data studio.
:::

## Stop a data studio

This functionality is available to all user roles with the **Maintain** role and above.

> To stop a running session, select the three dots next to the status message and then select **Stop**. The status will change from **running** to **stopped**. When a data studio session is stopped, the compute resources it's using are deallocated. You can stop a session at any time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To stop a running session, select the three dots next to the status message and then select **Stop**. The status will change from **running** to **stopped**. When a data studio session is stopped, the compute resources it's using are deallocated. You can stop a session at any time.

Stopping a running session creates a new checkpoint.
```

When you restart a stopped session, a new session with the same configuration is created, using the most recent checkpoint.

## Start a new data studio from a checkpoint

This functionality is available to all user roles with the **Maintain** role and above.

You can start a new data studio from an existing stopped data studio. This will inherit the history of the parent data studio checkpoint state. From the list of **stopped** data studios in your workspace, select the three dots next to the status message for the data studio and select **Start as new**. Alternatively, from the data studio detail page select the **Checkpoints** tab and choose a non-running checkpoint to start a new data studio from by clicking the three dots in the `Actions` column and selecting **Start as new**.

## Delete a data studio

This functionality is available to all user roles with the **Maintain** role and above.

You can only delete a data studio when it's **stopped**. Select the three dots next to the status message and then select **Delete**. The data studio is deleted immediately and can't be recovered.

## Data studio checkpoints

> When you start a data studio, it automatically creates a *checkpoint*. A checkpoint persists changes that you make to the data studio root filesystem. The checkpoint is persisted on the compute environment's pipeline work directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you start a newly added data studio for the first time, it automatically creates a *checkpoint*. A checkpoint persists changes that you make to the data studio root filesystem. The checkpoint is persisted on the compute environment's pipeline work directory.
```

![](./_images/data_studios.png)

## Collaborate in a data studio

This functionality is available to all user roles excluding the **View** role.

To share a link to a running data studio with collaborators inside your workspace, select the three dots next to the status message for the data studio you want to share, then select **Copy data studio URL**. Using this link other authenticated users can access the session directly.

:::note
Collaborators need valid workspace permissions to connect to the running data studio.
:::

## Stop a data studio

This functionality is available to all user roles with the **Maintain** role and above.

To stop a running session, select the three dots next to the status message and then select **Stop**. The status will change from **running** to **stopped**. When a data studio session is stopped, the compute resources it's using are deallocated. You can stop a session at any time.

Stopping a running session creates a new checkpoint.

:::note
Make sure you save before you stop a data studio.
:::

## Restart a stopped data studio

This functionality is available to all user roles with the **Maintain** role and above.

> When you restart a stopped session, a new session with the same configuration is created, using the most recent checkpoint.

Author: I'm a bit confused here with what we mean by restart :sweat_smile:. Is this just starting a session or are we referring to start as new from the list?

Reviewer 2: This is just starting a session, not `Start as new`

Author: In that case, is there a reason for this section at all considering that there is a section for [Start a data studio](https://github.com/seqeralabs/docs/pull/26/files#diff-fe51911e951cfe92d20f903be2226b5c217b4d737d5904b4ffa83e6933c6a078R85) and a section for [Start a new data studio from a checkpoint](https://github.com/seqeralabs/docs/pull/26/files#diff-fe51911e951cfe92d20f903be2226b5c217b4d737d5904b4ffa83e6933c6a078R139)

> When you restart a stopped session, a new session with the same configuration is created, using the most recent checkpoint.

Reviewer 2: Simplified:
```suggestion
When you restart a stopped session, the session uses the most recent checkpoint.
```

> ## Start a new data studio from a checkpoint

Reviewer 2: We're missing a whole section on starting a new data studio from a checkpoint @jason-seqera 

CC: @jimmypoms

Reviewer: @robnewman, I've added a section for this. Let me know what other salient points we want to surface about this functionality. Thanks!

This functionality is available to all user roles with the **Maintain** role and above.

You can start a new data studio from an existing stopped data studio. This will inherit the history of the parent data studio checkpoint state. From the list of **stopped** data studios in your workspace, select the three dots next to the status message for the data studio and select **Start as new**. Alternatively, from the data studio detail page select the **Checkpoints** tab and choose a non-running checkpoint to start a new data studio from by clicking the three dots in the `Actions` column and selecting **Start as new**.

## Delete a data studio

This functionality is available to all user roles with the **Maintain** role and above.

You can only delete a data studio when it's **stopped**. Select the three dots next to the status message and then select **Delete**. The data studio is deleted immediately and can't be recovered.

## Data studio checkpoints

> When you start a newly-added data studio for the first time, it automatically creates a *checkpoint*. A checkpoint saves changes that you make to the data studio root filesystem and stores it in the compute environment's pipeline work directory.

Author: Clarification: A checkpoint is created every time a data studio session starts, no matter whether it is existing or newly-added, or for the first time :)

> When you restart a data studio, or start a new data studio from a previously created checkpoint, changes such as installed software packages and configuration files are restored and available in the data studio session. Changes to mounted datasets are not included in the checkpoint.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When you restart a data studio, or start a new data studio from a previously created checkpoint, changes such as installed software packages and configuration files are restored and made available in the data studio session. Changes made to mounted datasets are not included in a checkpoint.
```

![](./_images/data_studios.png)

> ## Collaborate in a data studio

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Collaborate in a data studio

This functionality is available to all user roles excluding the **Viewer** role.
```

To share a link to a running data studio with collaborators inside your workspace, select the three dots next to the status message for the data studio you want to share, then select **Copy data studio URL**. Using this link other authenticated users can access the session directly.

:::note

> Collaborators will need valid permissions to connect to the running data studio (at least the **Connect** role for the workspace).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Collaborators will need valid workspace permissions to connect to the running data studio (all user roles excluding the **Viewer** role).
```

:::

> ## Stop a data studio

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Stop a data studio

This functionality is available to all user roles with the **Maintainer** role and above.
```

To stop a running session, select the three dots next to the status message and then select **Stop**. The status will change from **running** to **stopped**. When a data studio session is stopped, the compute resources it's using are deallocated. You can stop a session at any time.

:::note
Make sure you save before you stop a data studio.
:::

> ## Restart a stopped data studio

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Restart a stopped data studio

This functionality is available to all user roles with the **Maintainer** role and above.
```

> When you restart a stopped session, a new session with the same configuration is created.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you restart a stopped session, a new session with the same configuration is created, using the most recent checkpoint.
```

> ## Delete a data studio

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Start a new data studio from a checkpoint

This functionality is available to all user roles with the **Maintainer** role and above.

You can start a new data studio from an existing stopped data studio. This will inherit the history of the parent data studio checkpoint state. From the list of **stopped** data studios in your workspace, select the three dots next to the status message for the data studio and select **Start as new**. Alternatively, from the data studio detail page select the **Checkpoints** tab and choose a non-running checkpoint to start a new data studio from by clicking the three dots in the `Actions` column and selecting **Start as new**.

## Delete a data studio

This functionality is available to all user roles with the **Maintainer** role and above.
```

- **stopped**: When a session is stopped, the associated compute resources are deallocated and any unsaved state is lost. You can start a session or delete the data studio when it's in this state.
- **errored**: This state most often indicates that there has been an error starting the data studio but it is in a **stopped** state. There might be errors reported by the data studio session itself but these currently will be overwritten with a **running** status if the studio is still running. If you encounter an error with the private preview release of Data Studios, please reach out to your Seqera account manager.

### Data studio checkpoints

> When a data studio starts, a new checkpoint is created. Every change to the root filesystem of the session outside of mounted datasets is recorded in the checkpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a data studio starts, a new checkpoint is created. Every change to the root filesystem is recorded in the checkpoint. Changes to mounted datasets are not included in the checkpoint.
```

Something like this I think is more clear, if I understand correctly.

### What happens if the memory allocation of the data studio is exceeded?

The running container in the AWS Batch compute environment inherits the memory limits specified by the data studio configuration when adding or starting the session. The kernel then handles the memory as if running natively on Linux. Linux can overcommit memory, leading to possible out-of-memory errors in a container environment. The kernel has protections in place to prevent this, but it can happen, and in this case, the process is killed. This can manifest as a performance lag, killed subprocesses, or at worst, a killed data studio session.

### All my datasets are read-only

> By default, AWS Batch compute environments created with Batch Forge restrict access to S3 to the working directory only unless additional Allowed S3 Buckets are specified.

Reviewer: Is _Allowed S3 Buckets_ a UI element?

Author: It is and it is also referred to in other parts of the documentation see https://docs.seqera.io/platform/23.4.0/compute-envs/aws-batch :)

Reviewer: @jimmypoms, looks like we've deprecated Fusion v1, though. Should we suggest people rely on this feature to have access to additional buckets? I'm not familiar with any of the background on this.

> By default, AWS Batch compute environments created with Batch Forge restrict access to S3 to the working directory only unless additional Allowed S3 Buckets are specified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, AWS Batch compute environments that are created with Batch Forge restrict access to S3 to the working directory only, unless additional **Allowed S3 Buckets** are specified.
```
